---
date: 2012-12-27
description: In order to improve your stylesheets, you first need to understand how browsers match CSS-selectors and HTML.
layout: post
title: Understanding CSS hierarchy-matching
---

To get a feel for how CSS-selectors should be written, you need to understand
how browsers match them to the related markup. The following tries to give a
top-level description that might not be entirely accurate but should still give
you a good enough idea of how CSS and HTML get combined during rendering.

**Note:** Writing this, I realized that this is probably not how it actually
works, as using regular expressions to match selectors and hierarchies would
obviate the need for repeated identification-cycles. Nevertheless, thinking of
the process this way helps writing simpler selectors, so the model remains
valid.


### Finding hierarchies

Consider a site with the following markup:

    <html>
      <head>
        // head omitted
      </head>

      <body>
        <header>
          <h1>Site title</h1>
        </header>

        <nav>
          <ol>
            <li>
              <a href="#">Link</a>
            </li>
            <li>
              <a href="#">Link</a>
            </li>
          </ol>
        </nav>

        <section>
          <article>
            <header>
              <h2>Article title</h2>

              <p>Date</p>
            </header>

            <p>Content</p>

            <p>Content with <a href="#">link</a></p>

            <ul>
              <li>
                <a href="#">Link</a>
              </li>
              <li>
                <a href="#">Link</a>
              </li>
            </ul>
          </article>
        </section>
      </body>
    </html>

When discarding the content and chaining all tags together according to their
nesting, the path to each tag can be extracted:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Tag</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>html</th>
      <td>html</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>body</th>
      <td>html body</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>header</th>
      <td>html body header</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>h1</th>
      <td>html body header h1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>nav</th>
      <td>html body nav</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>ol</th>
      <td>html body nav ol</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body nav ol li</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body nav ol li a</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body nav ol li</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body nav ol li a</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>section</th>
      <td>html body section</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>article</th>
      <td>html body section article</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>header</th>
      <td>html body section article header</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>h2</th>
      <td>html body section article header h2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>p</th>
      <td>html body section article header p</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>p</th>
      <td>html body section article p</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>p</th>
      <td>html body section article p</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body section article p a</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>ul</th>
      <td>html body section article ul</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article ul li</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body section article ul li a</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article ul li</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body section article ul li a</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Note that some tags share the same hierarchy.

While each hierarchy could be used as a (bad) CSS-selector, think of them as an
attribute we add to each tag that we now match against selectors.


### Matching simple selectors

**Selectors are matched to markup from right to left.** Single-tag selectors are
simplest and instruct the browser to ignore all elements whose hierarchy does
not end in the exact tag given.

For example, matching the above table against the selector `li` would trim it
down to just four elements:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Tag</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body nav ol <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body nav ol <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article ul <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article ul <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The browser only had to filter the initial table a single time to find these
elements and can now apply the styles set with the selector.


### Matching multi-level selectors

As soon as we chain selectors the browser has to iterate over intermediate
results multiple times, potentially filtering them with every step.

When applying a rule such as `ul > li`, the browser again starts at the
rightmost tag and filters the hierarchy-table to end up with the same result as
before:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Tag</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body nav ol <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body nav ol <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article ul <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article ul <strong>li</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

This list now gets filtered again to identify all `li`-tags nested _directly
below_ a `ul`-tag:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Tag</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article <strong>ul > li</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>li</th>
      <td>html body section article <strong>ul > li</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The more levels there are in a selector, the more times each resulting list
needs to be iterated over again.

While extending a selector will often result in a condensed list, unnecessary
extensions generate wasted filtering-cycles. In the above example, adding
`html > body > section > article >` in front of the selector would force the
browser to filter the result **four more times without altering the list**
before it could assert a match.


### Identification loops

While every level adds a new iteration over a filtered list of
potentially-matching tags, some selectors require a more complex analysis of a
single element’s hierarchy. While the child-selector (`>`) only requires a check
of the direct parent tag, a descendant-selector (space) might force the browser
to walk up the entire hierarchy trying to find a match.

For example, `nav a` first filters out all elements whose hierarchy does not end
in an `a`-tag, resulting in the following list:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Tag</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body nav ol li <strong>a</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body nav ol li <strong>a</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body section article p <strong>a</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body section article ul li <strong>a</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>a</th>
      <td>html body section article ul li <strong>a</strong></td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

When adding `nav` to the selector, the browser has to execute a more detailed
analysis of each element’s hierarchy. For the first element, it has to go
through the following steps:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Iteration</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
      <th>Result</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>html body nav ol <strong>li a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>html body nav <strong>ol</strong> li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>html body <strong>nav</strong> ol li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> found, match</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The browser can stop walking up this element’s hierarchy as soon as a match is
found and continue with the next element. In contrast to that, the last element
from the initial list gets matched against `nav a` as follows:

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Iteration</th>
      <th>Hierarchy</th>
      <th>Result</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>html body section article ul <strong>li a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>html body section article <strong>ul</strong> li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>html body section <strong>article</strong> ul li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>4</th>
      <td>html body <strong>section</strong> article ul li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>5</th>
      <td>html <strong>body</strong> section article ul li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, continue&hellip;</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>6</th>
      <td><strong>html</strong> body section article ul li <strong>a</strong></td>
      <td><code>nav</code> not found, no match</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

For elements that only match the end of a selector but not its beginning, the
browser has to walk up the entire hierarchy before it can assess that the
element definitely does not match.

In real-world examples, pages usually contain a much higher number of elements
with deeper and more complex hierarchies. Since the matching-process has to be
repeated for every element remaining after each filtering-step, it is best to
**keep nesting of markup to a minimum** and **use selectors that match or fail
as quickly as possible**.

You can read more recommendations on doing the latter in my post on
[writing high-performance CSS](/blog/writing-high-performance-css/).
