---
description: TODO
title: Résumé
---

### Education


#### B.Sc. Media Informatics (Human-Computer-Interaction) at [Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München](http://www.uni-muenchen.de/index.html)

October 2012 to present

After observing my fellow students struggle with basic problems in the official
“Introduction to Programming”-lecture during our first semester, I offered a
study group during which I went over all the basics in an easier-to-grasp
fashion. The regular attendance was at about 40 students a week, split over two
90 minute-long pseudo-lectures.

Organizing, planning and preparing such a regular event as well as experiencing
a teacher’s point of view was invaluable to me and I would happily do it again.


### Work experience


#### Freelance consulting and development

2009 to present

Under the banner of _islovely_, I support clients in their web-related projects.

While most of my [projects](/projects) revolve around content management
systems,


#### Frontend developer at [Westwing Home &amp; Living GmbH](http://westwing.de)

Early 2012

As part of a small team, I was responsible for rewriting big parts of the
frontend in the course of a plattform migration, during which I got to shape how
CSS-preprocessors were to be used, among other things.

I was put in charge of ensuring cross-browser compatibility across a wide range
of browsers on the Windows operating system, all the way down to IE7. All hacks
and IE-specific stylesheets could successfully be avoided through careful
restructuring of markup and stylesheets.

Additionally, I made sure that the code written by multiple developers met the
same high level of quality standards.


#### Video editor at [Taupo Tandem Skydiving](http://tts.net.nz)

May to December 2010

I was in charge of editing freefall-videos for customers on a number of
machines, sometimes editing on up to five iMacs at the same time for maximum
efficiency, often under intense pressure. Following this I presented the videos
to customers in a screening room.

During my time at Taupo Tandem Skydiving I streamlined the editing process and
simplified the audio- and video-equipment by reorganizing the setup and removing
legacy equipment to provide an easy-to-use environment for editors.


#### Web developer at [JUMO GmbH &amp; Co. KG](http://jumo.de)

December 2008 to March 2010

After evaluating a number of Java-based (as per the requirements) content
management systems, I was put in charge of the technical portion of migrating
the company’s website from a legacy Lotus Notes-based application to the new
system. During the course of this migration, provided Photoshop-mockups had to
be converted to functional HTML and CSS.

On multiple occasions, the open source CMS had to be extended to provide custom
functionality. For example, the included internationalisation-functionality did
not adequately meet the needs of this multinational company, so this feature had
to be adapted heavily.


### Other, more worldly things


#### Gap year in New Zealand and North America

March 2010 to April 2011

After my previous contract expired, I took a year off and left Germany for New
Zealand. Not having spoken a lot of English outside of classroom settings
before, I deliberately put myself in a situation where I would have to exercise
my linguistic capabilities.

Shortly after spending two months traveling the country I got a job as the
full-time video editor for [Taupo Tandem Skydiving](http://tts.net.nz), where I
picked up the sport of skydiving myself and made some of the best friends I have
ever had.

Following a full twelve months in New Zealand, I spent a few weeks in America,
amongst other things attending the highly inspirational
[SXSW 2010](http://sxsw.com).

Living and working with native speakers and experiencing these countries on my
own not only gave a huge boost to my linguistic skills, but also gave me fresh
perspectives on a multitude of issues.
